
**What is Docker?**
- Computer program which performs OS level virtualization / open platform for developing, running and shipping application.
- A software that can be used for containerization
- portable and easy to share
- Docker enables you to separate your applications from your infrastructure, so you can deliver software quickly.
- Docker version shows server by default as Linux.


When we talk about Docker, we are talking about entire ecosystem of Docker products which includes:

	• Docker Client (CLI)  : tool we use to run commands to talk to docker Daemion 
	• Docker Server (daemon): service runs on host operating system, its for downloading, building, running containers. 
	• Docker Machine: Docker Host machine 
	• Docker Hub/ Docker Registry: A registry is a stateless, highly scalable server-side application which you can use to store and download Docker images. Two types: public and private 
	• Docker Compose 


- Working as part of the Linux Foundation’s initiative, Docker and others have produced the **Open Container Initiative (OCI)** - a set of standards and specifications for how to structure and work with containers
- Applications based on the OCI can create and manage containers as well as Docker can
- Today there are many such applications out there - with names like Podman, Buildah, and others.


## Some major advantages of Docker/containers are as follows:

- Efficient hardware resource consumption
- Application and service isolation
- Faster deployment
- Microservices architecture
- The stateless nature of containers


### Efficient Hardware Resource Consumption: 

- **From Monolithic to Microservices** We had monolith applications in the past, but then people and companies started thinking about application scalability, security, reliability and high availability. And that is what created N-tier design. The N-tier design is a standard application design like 3-tier web applications where we have a web tier, application tier, and database backend.

- If you are going to isolate these applications by introducing popular virtualization techniques such as KVM, VMware, XEN, or Hyper-V, you will run into a different issue. There is going to be a lot of overhead because, in order to virtualize your app using any hypervisor, you will need to install an operating system on top of your hypervisor OS. This operating system needs CPU and memory to function. 
- For example, each VM has its own kernel and kernel space associated with it. A perfectly tuned container platform can give you up to four times more containers in comparison to standard VMs. It may be insignificant when you have five or ten VMs, but when we talk hundreds or thousands, it makes a huge difference. 
- Containers are an isolated set of different rules and resources inside a single operating system. 
- This means that containers can provide the same benefits as virtual machines but use far less CPU, memory, and storage.


### Application and Service Isolation: 

- in comparison to bare-metal application deployment, container technology (for example, Docker) provides an efficient
way to isolate applications, and other computer resources libraries from each other. 
- It not only provides these applications with the ability to co-exist on the same OS, but also provides efficient security, which is a big must for every customer-facing and content-sensitive application. 
- It allows you to update and patch your containerized applications independently of each other.


### Faster Deployment:

- We are talking about seconds to completely restart a container versus minutes or tens of minutes with bare-metal servers and VMs. 
- The main reason for this is that a container does not need to restart the whole OS, it just needs to restart the application itself.

```text
Docker is all about speed.
Develop Faster
Build Faster
Test Faster
Deploy Faster
Update Faster
Recover Faster
```



### Microservices Architecture:

- Containers bring application deployment to a whole new level by introducing microservices architecture. What it essentially means is that, if you have a monolith or N-tier application, it usually has many services communicating with each other.
- Containerizing your services allows you to break down your application into multiple pieces and work with each of them independently


### The Stateless nature of the container:

Containers are stateless, which means that you can bring containers up and down, create or destroy them at any time, and this will not affect your application performance. That is one of the greatest features of containers.

